---
layout: post
title: How Pinky and the Brain could finally conquer world by selling insurance
date: '2014-05-24 21:13:57'
---

"’Gee, Brain, what do you want to do tonight?’  ‘The same thing we do every night, Pinky—take over the world!’" echoes out, barely audible, from the television. It’s just after 7a.m. on a Sunday morning. Everyone else in the house is still sleeping, but I’m sitting with a cup of tea, watching cartoons and continuing a decades old ritual. Maybe it’s a childish diversion, a nostalgic indulgence, or a clear symptom of Peter-Pan syndrome. I don’t know, but it happens every Sunday. Adults like me aren’t supposed to like cartoons, but we do; *The Simpsons*, *Sponge Bob* and *South Park* attest to that. It is within paradoxes like this, in the gap between common knowledge and actual behavior, that the most interesting aspects of human nature can be found.

This is why I was interested in [two researchers who investigated the role of cartoons in advertising targeted at adults](http://www.deepdyve.com/lp/inderscience-publishers/are-cartoon-ads-effective-for-adult-consumers-qfBWla1YO2/3). The use of cartoons in advertising is nothing new; however, their use has mainly focused on children, and research into how cartoons affect adults is almost nonexistent. Would cartoons in advertising be considered annoying, or would cartoons break down the cold hard exterior of an adult? To understand the effect of cartoons in advertising, researchers created two advertisements, one with a cartoon and one without, for a number of different low involvement (facial tissues and mouth wash) and high involvement (laptop computers and acne cream) products. For each of these advertisements, participants were asked questions that would reveal their comprehension, recall, credibility, and attitudes towards each brand. Surprisingly, the cartoons did not improve the scores for the low involvement products, which people tend to buy without too much consideration; they did increase the scores for the high involvement products, which people tend to look at in much more detail. 

Why this happens is unclear, but it is possible that for high involvement, often serious products, the unexpected presence of a cartoon prevents the automatic judgment of that product and forces people to consider its features and benefits on its  own merits. In other words, if Pinky and the Brain were to focus their efforts on selling high involvement products like insurance, they could conquer the world in no time at all, provided the Geico Gecko doesn't get there first. 
